[Music]
In real life, people often praise
love that is giving everything, even giving everything away.
But I don't praise that kind of love
because it
loses all
reason and wisdom. I
don't honor that kind of love.
[Music]
Namo Buddha Shakyamuni.
Greetings to all esteemed Dharma friends. Dear esteemed Dharma friends,
as a woman living with a
husband, everyone wishes for a
happy life, but some people are
unhappy and want to leave their husbands, which is
very difficult and agonizing. Today, I would like to
answer a question from a friend about
this issue.
Question: My husband has a wife and two
children. He deceived me by saying he had divorced his wife. When we were preparing for our wedding,
he told me the truth: he hadn't divorced his
ex-wife because we had already prepared for the wedding. So I
had to accept it. We lived happily for
two years, but then many conflicts arose. He was addicted to
gambling and lottery. He couldn't make ends meet and kept deceiving me into
borrowing money.  Nearly 100 million.
Now he works far away, so I don't
know how he's living. At the end of
2019, I went to my husband's company and they
said he was living with another woman
as if they were husband and wife. Please give me
advice and guidance on how to practice Buddhism, because my mother won't
let me leave my husband, and we have
a son together. I beg you, please help me. I am deeply grateful for
your kindness and compassion. Respectfully, to all esteemed Dharma friends, and to my friend, I
deeply
sympathize with your situation.
Your life is like being constantly deceived. You
married someone who already had a wife,
then he came to live with you, and he
continued to deceive you, both financially and
emotionally. And you're also
suffering because you want to leave, but your mother won't let you. That
's the real
suffering. Because with your strength,
working to raise a child is already very difficult
and challenging. And then, after saving up some
money, your husband comes back and takes half of it.
I
think it's possible that this 100 million might not even be enough.  It must be
money I've saved up, or maybe
I've borrowed from my mother and
friends. If I have to pay it back, it will be
very difficult. And you don't
hate your husband that much; it's called
an irrational love, just loving without any reason. In
life,
people often praise love that's all-consuming,
even for a lover, giving everything.
But
I don't praise that kind of
all-consuming love because it loses all reason, meaning it
lacks morality and intelligence. I don't honor that kind of
love; it's called
blind love. To be frank,
if you maintain
this relationship, thinking you'll have a
son together, what do you think
your son
will learn from his
father? Because you're living for your child.  So, we have to
consider what our child will learn from their father,
or whether they will be deeply hurt compared
to becoming a single mother
raising a child, living a moral and
ethical life, setting a good example for our child, and showing them
love. If we live with our husband like that, our child will
feel our affection and
become a good person. But if you live
with your husband like that,
you will certainly have a lot of worries in your heart,
and those worries will be transferred to your
child. Your child will be hurt; they
won't receive your love,
nor their
father's love, and they will resent their
father more, and resent their mother
more too. Because if the mother is already troubled,
how can she love her child? It's better to
leave and then tell
your child to love their father. That would be
better. Why do I say that? Because you
said your mother won't let you leave. But I
insist that your mother can't do that. It's just that
you're still hesitant,
still emotionally attached to this husband, and
you can't be decisive.
Because I was rational,
I went along with my mother's wishes. If
something brought me suffering, I would firmly believe it.
Any mother would
agree. Therefore, a mother's love is
very broad and deep. If
it truly benefits
her child, the mother may not understand at first,
but she will understand later. She only
said that some people become monks or nuns, but
parents don't want their children to.
However, seeing their child love the monastic
life, seeing their child happy and
joyful, not sad but
happy when talking about living a
monastic life, parents will gradually
agree. Why do parents agree? Because parents already
have in their hearts the love and
desire for their child's happiness.
So when they see their child happy,
parents will agree. Therefore, you
must radiate your own happiness.
If you don't have a husband, or
your child doesn't have a husband, you must
radiate that happiness, and then you will gain
your mother's approval. This
is what you need to do.  It's all about your own heart,
not about obeying your parents.
This is where you come in. If you
don't understand this, later on, if
something happens to you, you'll blame your
parents.
You'll blame your mother.
For example, if your husband gambles
too much, cheats you out of money,
or beats you because of other women, and you're hurt,
your child suffers,
then you'll blame your mother, saying it's
her fault you can't leave him. At
that point, you'll be unfilial, and you'll lose your
support system—your mother. You'll
become lonely in this life,
without a husband to rely on, without parents to rely on,
and without a child to turn to
for happiness. So,
your problem is that you must cultivate
your intellect, clearly discern the
truth, clearly distinguish between good and evil, and
clearly recognize whether someone is good or
evil. If someone is evil, you
should abandon them, keep your distance, and not
go to their company to question them.
How should he live? Because no matter how he lives,
he still has to bring money home
to support his second child. If he can't
make a living, he needs to have affection;
he needs both. It's okay if he doesn't have money or affection,
but he shouldn't be a
burden to himself. If he doesn't have affection or
love, he can go anywhere.
Even without money, he should still come home.
He shouldn't take any of his money or anything that harms him. He should still
save it for his child. That's still called a sacrifice. But here he is,
taking all of
his child's money and everything else. How
can he live like that?
He's harming his child. I've
explained it to you completely. If you
live an independent, resolute, and determined life,
live alone and live happily.
You can practice Buddhism to
transform your mind and achieve
enlightenment. You can still
live on your own because you have a kind heart.
Live with a kind heart.
You will be much happier.
Then you ask me how you should practice to...
It's good for
you. Then I also advise you to
think rationally and you can practice
the
eighth lesson in the tn.com practice, dedicating the
merit to yourself. In
this practice, there are many teachings that can help you achieve
enlightenment. And another part is that
you need to think about your past karma
so you can dedicate it to the
beings you harmed in your previous lives.
Firstly, if you were deceived in love, then
surely in your previous life you also
lived with the deception of
others' feelings. I'll just give you an
example: imagine someone deceives others by saying, "
Come here, I'll give you a
good life," but
then they believe them and sell them
into prostitution. Before that, they were deceived
emotionally, causing them a lifetime of
suffering. Naturally,
they end up in a brothel and can't
escape, so they have to live
there, a life of
suffering. Even if they become prostitutes, they don't
get any
money; they are controlled by their masters.  The house was stripped of all their
money, they only got a little.
So now we have to face
such injustice, it's very painful. They want to escape
from the brothel, but they can't.
So now we are in that suffering, and
we don't even get the consent
to leave. Perhaps we are in
that situation, so we should think about the
suffering of those people to
repent for our sins and from
now on abandon evil deeds, practice
Buddhism, and do good deeds so that in many lifetimes
we will not suffer like this again, never again. When
we understand
karma, then we don't
hate this husband. Because it's just
a karmic connection for us to repay our past karma.
This husband is the one
creating karma. He's creating new karma,
plus we're paying off old karma. If
our hearts are filled with resentment, sorrow, anger, and
revenge, then we
will encounter this man again in the
next life to repay our debts, or in
this life we ​​won't be able to break free. He
will continue to cause us suffering.  My heart is still
attached and can't let go. If I
don't practice Buddhism and attain enlightenment,
my karma won't stop,
so my heart will generate feelings of affection and
clinging to this man. I
won't develop boredom or a
desire to let go.
So, to develop the desire to let go,
we either need to end our karmic connection with
him, or we need to achieve enlightenment.
If we end our karma, we'll
naturally think, "Why am I
suffering so much? Living with
this man doesn't benefit me at all." At
that moment, we'll be enlightened, our karma will
end, and only then will
we be able to think like that. Or
we need to practice to achieve enlightenment, because
enlightenment is the transformation of
karma, and only then will we end our
karma. You should also follow the
program the teacher is guiding you through for a
while. If your karma
changes, then your husband will also
change, which is good. But if
your capacity for diligence hasn't changed,
then you can't possibly overcome this
feeling.  He is a good person,
but you cannot possess him because you
haven't fully cultivated your spiritual practice. Therefore, you
must sever ties, meaning you must abandon your
family life with him. Let
me explain this a little more clearly:
we accept leaving our husband
when he is too corrupt and we no
longer have his love.
That severance is also a way of breaking
free from attachment. However, if we leave our
husband when he is sick or ill, that
is immoral. Then we
will suffer karmic consequences. But if we abandon
this useless, heartless, and inhumane husband who has treated
us this way, then
we can also
transform our karma through this severance of attachment.
However, we must actively do
good deeds to transform
our karma. Otherwise,
simply severing ties won't end our karma, and
our lives will be filled with
suffering. It's
not simply a matter of letting go and ending suffering.
Okay, so we only consider ourselves
free
from karma when we no longer feel love, when
we feel we have done
nothing wrong to others, when we attain enlightenment and
no longer feel
love. That's when we can say we've
freed ourselves from karma. That's how we know when our
karma is over. Regarding our husband, it's when we
no longer feel love, and he treats
us with complete morality. Only then can we
say we've freed ourselves from karma, my dear fellow
practitioners. So,
in your question, I advise you, and
you should also
consider this. If anyone has
such a situation, please
advise them so they
can escape suffering and practice Buddhism to transform their karma. Transforming their
karma might even
change their husband, and if he doesn't
change, then transforming
their own karma will bring them peace and freedom from
defilement. That's the power
of our practice. I
wish you all continued
progress. Namaste.  Buddha Shakyamuni
[music]
[Applause]
Ni y